---
recipe: true
blog_post: false
layout: default
date: 2023-08-15T00:00:00Z
title: Negroni
summary: How to start enjoying an objectively disgusting cocktail.

---

There are three types of people: (1) people who don't drink; (2) people who like negronis; (3) people who will soon like negronis. If you're in the first or second camp, you're doing just fine. This post is mostly aimed at people in the third camp, a transitory state that one might mistake as permanent. 

The tried-and-true strategy to warm up to negronis is having more of them. But Campari is no fun for an unfamiliar palate, and if you're going to be consuming ~~poison~~ ethanol, it'd better at least be delicious. There's a much quicker way to begin liking negronis, not unlike the strategy one would follow to lift more weight: progressive overload. Take baby steps towards its polarizing flavor profile, and it'll seem much more approachable once you get there.

Here's a suggested ordering:  
1. **Aperol Spritz** -- stir over ice: 3 parts prosecco, 2 parts aperol, 1 part soda.
2. **Paper Plane** -- shake with ice: equal parts bourbon, aperol, amaro Nonino or amaro Meletti, and lemon juice.
3. **Aperol Boulevardier** -- stir over large ice: 4 parts rye or bourbon, 2 parts aperol, 3 parts sweet vermouth[^1].
4. **Negroni Sour** -- dry shake without ice: 2 parts gin/Campari/sweet vermouth, 1 part lemon juice, 1 part egg white, 2 dashes orange bitters. Then wet shake with ice, and garnish with drops of orange flower water or rose water.
5. **Negroni** -- stir over large ice: equal parts gin, Campari, sweet vermouth.

[^1]: Equal parts is also fine, but I find it to be too sweet.

There are also a few bits of technique that, surprisingly, can significantly affect your results. The biggest one is pre-stirring before adding to your serving glass. It may seem like there's no point dirtying a separate mixing vessel, but the dilution and chilling goes a long way towards producing a widely palatable result. Try giving the ingredients a good stir over ice for at least 20 seconds (if you don't have a barspoon, a chopstick works well), and then strain into your serving glass over a large ice cube. (The large ice cube melts slower, so you can sip slowly without fear of over-dilution.) The other critical component is the garnish: an orange peel goes a really long way in taking Campari out of acrid territory and into the bright, citrusy regime. (Watch a couple videos if you're not quite sure how to express the citrus oils, as this also makes a big difference.)

Once you're on board, there's much room for further customization. For example, the choices of gin and sweet vermouth present a very wide design space. Regarding gins: If you want something simple and classic, Beefeater is a good choice. If you want even more bitterness/nuttiness, try Bombay Sapphire. For less juniper and more lemony citrus, go for Plymouth. Regarding vermouths: Cocchi di Torino is my personal favorite, with a deep, rich, sweetness and strong vanilla & cola notes. Dolin is more herbal; I smell a lot of thyme in it. Punt e Mes is somewhere in between a vermouth and an amaro, so it'll take your drink further into bitter territory. Next, the equal parts ratio should just be taken as a starting point. I find it to be too sweet, and prefer something closer to 2 : 1.25 : 1.25 (usually 40ml : 25ml : 25ml). More generally, you should view the template of roughly equal parts spirit-amaro-vermouth as a flexible template where a lot of great drinks happen.